README.rst, before:

Torch autodiff for DFT-D3
=========================

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/dftd3/tad-dftd3
   :target: https://github.com/dftd3/tad-dftd3/releases/latest
   :alt: Release

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/tad-dftd3
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/tad-dftd3/
   :alt: PyPI

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/github/license/dftd3/tad-dftd3
   :target: LICENSE
   :alt: Apache-2.0

.. image:: https://github.com/dftd3/tad-dftd3/actions/workflows/python.yaml/badge.svg
   :target: https://github.com/dftd3/tad-dftd3/actions/workflows/python.yaml
   :alt: CI

.. image:: https://readthedocs.org/projects/tad-dftd3/badge/?version=latest
   :target: https://tad-dftd3.readthedocs.io
   :alt: Documentation Status

.. image:: https://codecov.io/gh/dftd3/tad-dftd3/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=D3rMNnl26t
   :target: https://codecov.io/gh/dftd3/tad-dftd3
   :alt: Coverage

.. image:: https://results.pre-commit.ci/badge/github/dftd3/tad-dftd3/main.svg
   :target: https://results.pre-commit.ci/latest/github/dftd3/tad-dftd3/main
   :alt: pre-commit.ci status


Implementation of the DFT-D3 dispersion model in PyTorch.
This module allows to process a single structure or a batch of structures for the calculation of atom-resolved dispersion energies.

For details on the D3 dispersion model see

- *J. Chem. Phys.*, **2010**, *132*, 154104 (`DOI <https://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3382344>`__)
- *J. Comput. Chem.*, **2011**, *32*, 1456 (`DOI <https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jcc.21759>`__)

For alternative implementations also check out

`simple-dftd3 <https://dftd3.readthedocs.io>`__:
  Simple reimplementation of the DFT-D3 dispersion model in Fortran with Python bindings

`torch-dftd <https://tech.preferred.jp/en/blog/oss-pytorch-dftd3/>`__:
  PyTorch implementation of DFT-D2 and DFT-D3

`dispax <https://github.com/awvwgk/dispax>`__:
  Implementation of the DFT-D3 dispersion model in Jax M.D.


Installation
------------

This project is hosted on GitHub at `dftd3/tad-dftd3 <https://github.com/dftd3/tad-dftd3>`__.
Obtain the source by cloning the repository with

.. code::

   git clone https://github.com/dftd3/tad-dftd3
   cd tad-dftd3

We recommend using a `conda <https://conda.io/>`__ environment to install the package.
You can setup the environment manager using a `mambaforge <https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge>`__ installer.
Install the required dependencies from the conda-forge channel.

.. code::

   mamba env create -n torch -f environment.yml
   mamba activate torch

For development, install the following additional dependencies

.. code::

   mamba install black coverage covdefaults mypy pre-commit pylint pytest tox


Install this project with pip in the environment

.. code::

   pip install .

Add the option ``-e`` for installing in development mode.

The following dependencies are required

- `numpy <https://numpy.org/>`__
- `torch <https://pytorch.org/>`__
- `pytest <https://docs.pytest.org/>`__ (tests only)

You can check your installation by running the test suite with pytest

.. code::

   pytest tests/ --pyargs tad_dftd3

or tox for testing multiple Python versions

.. code::

  tox


Example
-------

The following example shows how to calculate the DFT-D3 dispersion energy for a single structure.

.. code:: python

   import torch
   import tad_dftd3 as d3

   numbers = d3.util.to_number(symbols="C C C C N C S H H H H H".split())
   positions = torch.tensor(
       [
           [-2.56745685564671, -0.02509985979910, 0.00000000000000],
           [-1.39177582455797, +2.27696188880014, 0.00000000000000],
           [+1.27784995624894, +2.45107479759386, 0.00000000000000],
           [+2.62801937615793, +0.25927727028120, 0.00000000000000],
           [+1.41097033661123, -1.99890996077412, 0.00000000000000],
           [-1.17186102298849, -2.34220576284180, 0.00000000000000],
           [-2.39505990368378, -5.22635838332362, 0.00000000000000],
           [+2.41961980455457, -3.62158019253045, 0.00000000000000],
           [-2.51744374846065, +3.98181713686746, 0.00000000000000],
           [+2.24269048384775, +4.24389473203647, 0.00000000000000],
           [+4.66488984573956, +0.17907568006409, 0.00000000000000],
           [-4.60044244782237, -0.17794734637413, 0.00000000000000],
       ]
   )
   param = {
       "a1": torch.tensor(0.49484001),
       "s8": torch.tensor(0.78981345),
       "a2": torch.tensor(5.73083694),
   }

   energy = d3.dftd3(numbers, positions, param)

   torch.set_printoptions(precision=10)
   print(energy)
   # tensor([-0.0004075971, -0.0003940886, -0.0003817684, -0.0003949536,
   #         -0.0003577212, -0.0004110279, -0.0005385976, -0.0001808242,
   #         -0.0001563670, -0.0001503394, -0.0001577045, -0.0001764488])


The next example shows the calculation of dispersion energies for a batch of structures, while retaining access to all intermediates used for calculating the dispersion energy.

.. code:: python

   import torch
   import tad_dftd3 as d3

   sample1 = dict(
       numbers=d3.util.to_number("Pb H H H H Bi H H H".split()),
       positions=torch.tensor(
           [
               [-0.00000020988889, -4.98043478877778, +0.00000000000000],
               [+3.06964045311111, -6.06324400177778, +0.00000000000000],
               [-1.53482054188889, -6.06324400177778, -2.65838526500000],
               [-1.53482054188889, -6.06324400177778, +2.65838526500000],
               [-0.00000020988889, -1.72196703577778, +0.00000000000000],
               [-0.00000020988889, +4.77334244722222, +0.00000000000000],
               [+1.35700257511111, +6.70626379422222, -2.35039772300000],
               [-2.71400388988889, +6.70626379422222, +0.00000000000000],
               [+1.35700257511111, +6.70626379422222, +2.35039772300000],
           ]
       ),
   )
   sample2 = dict(
       numbers=d3.util.to_number("C C C C C C I H H H H H S H C H H H".split(" ")),
       positions=torch.tensor(
           [
               [-1.42754169820131, -1.50508961850828, -1.93430551124333],
               [+1.19860572924150, -1.66299114873979, -2.03189643761298],
               [+2.65876001301880, +0.37736955363609, -1.23426391650599],
               [+1.50963368042358, +2.57230374419743, -0.34128058818180],
               [-1.12092277855371, +2.71045691257517, -0.25246348639234],
               [-2.60071517756218, +0.67879949508239, -1.04550707592673],
               [-2.86169588073340, +5.99660765711210, +1.08394899986031],
               [+2.09930989272956, -3.36144811062374, -2.72237695164263],
               [+2.64405246349916, +4.15317840474646, +0.27856972788526],
               [+4.69864865613751, +0.26922271535391, -1.30274048619151],
               [-4.63786461351839, +0.79856258572808, -0.96906659938432],
               [-2.57447518692275, -3.08132039046931, -2.54875517521577],
               [-5.88211879210329, 11.88491819358157, +2.31866455902233],
               [-8.18022701418703, 10.95619984550779, +1.83940856333092],
               [-5.08172874482867, 12.66714386256482, -0.92419491629867],
               [-3.18311711399702, 13.44626574330220, -0.86977613647871],
               [-5.07177399637298, 10.99164969235585, -2.10739192258756],
               [-6.35955320518616, 14.08073002965080, -1.68204314084441],
           ]
       ),
   )
   numbers = d3.util.pack(
       (
           sample1["numbers"],
           sample2["numbers"],
       )
   )
   positions = d3.util.pack(
       (
           sample1["positions"],
           sample2["positions"],
       )
   )
   ref = d3.reference.Reference()
   rcov = d3.data.covalent_rad_d3[numbers]
   rvdw = d3.data.vdw_rad_d3[numbers.unsqueeze(-1), numbers.unsqueeze(-2)]
   r4r2 = d3.data.sqrt_z_r4_over_r2[numbers]
   param = {
       "a1": torch.tensor(0.49484001),
       "s8": torch.tensor(0.78981345),
       "a2": torch.tensor(5.73083694),
   }

   cn = d3.ncoord.coordination_number(numbers, positions, rcov, d3.ncoord.exp_count)
   weights = d3.model.weight_references(numbers, cn, ref, d3.model.gaussian_weight)
   c6 = d3.model.atomic_c6(numbers, weights, ref)
   energy = d3.disp.dispersion(
       numbers, positions, c6, rvdw, r4r2, d3.disp.rational_damping, **param
   )

   torch.set_printoptions(precision=10)
   print(torch.sum(energy, dim=-1))
   # tensor([-0.0014092578, -0.0057840119])


Contributing
------------

This is a volunteer open source projects and contributions are always welcome.
Please, take a moment to read the `contributing guidelines <CONTRIBUTING.md>`__.


License
-------

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the “License”);
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an *“as is” basis*,
*without warranties or conditions of any kind*, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally
submitted for inclusion in this project by you, as defined in the
Apache-2.0 license, shall be licensed as above, without any additional
terms or conditions.

Commit message:

Minor update to README and setup (#13)
* Remove wrong omit option from coverage
* Add pip install

README.rst, after:

Torch autodiff for DFT-D3
=========================

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/dftd3/tad-dftd3
   :target: https://github.com/dftd3/tad-dftd3/releases/latest
   :alt: Release

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/tad-dftd3
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/tad-dftd3/
   :alt: PyPI

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/github/license/dftd3/tad-dftd3
   :target: LICENSE
   :alt: Apache-2.0

.. image:: https://github.com/dftd3/tad-dftd3/actions/workflows/python.yaml/badge.svg
   :target: https://github.com/dftd3/tad-dftd3/actions/workflows/python.yaml
   :alt: CI

.. image:: https://readthedocs.org/projects/tad-dftd3/badge/?version=latest
   :target: https://tad-dftd3.readthedocs.io
   :alt: Documentation Status

.. image:: https://codecov.io/gh/dftd3/tad-dftd3/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=D3rMNnl26t
   :target: https://codecov.io/gh/dftd3/tad-dftd3
   :alt: Coverage

.. image:: https://results.pre-commit.ci/badge/github/dftd3/tad-dftd3/main.svg
   :target: https://results.pre-commit.ci/latest/github/dftd3/tad-dftd3/main
   :alt: pre-commit.ci status


Implementation of the DFT-D3 dispersion model in PyTorch.
This module allows to process a single structure or a batch of structures for the calculation of atom-resolved dispersion energies.

For details on the D3 dispersion model see

- *J. Chem. Phys.*, **2010**, *132*, 154104 (`DOI <https://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3382344>`__)
- *J. Comput. Chem.*, **2011**, *32*, 1456 (`DOI <https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jcc.21759>`__)

For alternative implementations also check out

`simple-dftd3 <https://dftd3.readthedocs.io>`__:
  Simple reimplementation of the DFT-D3 dispersion model in Fortran with Python bindings

`torch-dftd <https://tech.preferred.jp/en/blog/oss-pytorch-dftd3/>`__:
  PyTorch implementation of DFT-D2 and DFT-D3

`dispax <https://github.com/awvwgk/dispax>`__:
  Implementation of the DFT-D3 dispersion model in Jax M.D.


Installation
------------

pip
~~~

The project can easily be installed with ``pip``.

.. code::

   pip install tad-dftd3


From source
~~~~~~~~~~~

This project is hosted on GitHub at `dftd3/tad-dftd3 <https://github.com/dftd3/tad-dftd3>`__.
Obtain the source by cloning the repository with

.. code::

   git clone https://github.com/dftd3/tad-dftd3
   cd tad-dftd3

We recommend using a `conda <https://conda.io/>`__ environment to install the package.
You can setup the environment manager using a `mambaforge <https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge>`__ installer.
Install the required dependencies from the conda-forge channel.

.. code::

   mamba env create -n torch -f environment.yml
   mamba activate torch

For development, install the following additional dependencies

.. code::

   mamba install black coverage covdefaults mypy pre-commit pylint pytest tox


Install this project with pip in the environment

.. code::

   pip install .

Add the option ``-e`` for installing in development mode.

The following dependencies are required

- `numpy <https://numpy.org/>`__
- `torch <https://pytorch.org/>`__
- `pytest <https://docs.pytest.org/>`__ (tests only)

You can check your installation by running the test suite with pytest

.. code::

   pytest tests/ --pyargs tad_dftd3

or tox for testing multiple Python versions

.. code::

  tox


Example
-------

The following example shows how to calculate the DFT-D3 dispersion energy for a single structure.

.. code:: python

   import torch
   import tad_dftd3 as d3

   numbers = d3.util.to_number(symbols="C C C C N C S H H H H H".split())
   positions = torch.tensor(
       [
           [-2.56745685564671, -0.02509985979910, 0.00000000000000],
           [-1.39177582455797, +2.27696188880014, 0.00000000000000],
           [+1.27784995624894, +2.45107479759386, 0.00000000000000],
           [+2.62801937615793, +0.25927727028120, 0.00000000000000],
           [+1.41097033661123, -1.99890996077412, 0.00000000000000],
           [-1.17186102298849, -2.34220576284180, 0.00000000000000],
           [-2.39505990368378, -5.22635838332362, 0.00000000000000],
           [+2.41961980455457, -3.62158019253045, 0.00000000000000],
           [-2.51744374846065, +3.98181713686746, 0.00000000000000],
           [+2.24269048384775, +4.24389473203647, 0.00000000000000],
           [+4.66488984573956, +0.17907568006409, 0.00000000000000],
           [-4.60044244782237, -0.17794734637413, 0.00000000000000],
       ]
   )
   param = {
       "a1": torch.tensor(0.49484001),
       "s8": torch.tensor(0.78981345),
       "a2": torch.tensor(5.73083694),
   }

   energy = d3.dftd3(numbers, positions, param)

   torch.set_printoptions(precision=10)
   print(energy)
   # tensor([-0.0004075971, -0.0003940886, -0.0003817684, -0.0003949536,
   #         -0.0003577212, -0.0004110279, -0.0005385976, -0.0001808242,
   #         -0.0001563670, -0.0001503394, -0.0001577045, -0.0001764488])


The next example shows the calculation of dispersion energies for a batch of structures, while retaining access to all intermediates used for calculating the dispersion energy.

.. code:: python

   import torch
   import tad_dftd3 as d3

   sample1 = dict(
       numbers=d3.util.to_number("Pb H H H H Bi H H H".split()),
       positions=torch.tensor(
           [
               [-0.00000020988889, -4.98043478877778, +0.00000000000000],
               [+3.06964045311111, -6.06324400177778, +0.00000000000000],
               [-1.53482054188889, -6.06324400177778, -2.65838526500000],
               [-1.53482054188889, -6.06324400177778, +2.65838526500000],
               [-0.00000020988889, -1.72196703577778, +0.00000000000000],
               [-0.00000020988889, +4.77334244722222, +0.00000000000000],
               [+1.35700257511111, +6.70626379422222, -2.35039772300000],
               [-2.71400388988889, +6.70626379422222, +0.00000000000000],
               [+1.35700257511111, +6.70626379422222, +2.35039772300000],
           ]
       ),
   )
   sample2 = dict(
       numbers=d3.util.to_number("C C C C C C I H H H H H S H C H H H".split(" ")),
       positions=torch.tensor(
           [
               [-1.42754169820131, -1.50508961850828, -1.93430551124333],
               [+1.19860572924150, -1.66299114873979, -2.03189643761298],
               [+2.65876001301880, +0.37736955363609, -1.23426391650599],
               [+1.50963368042358, +2.57230374419743, -0.34128058818180],
               [-1.12092277855371, +2.71045691257517, -0.25246348639234],
               [-2.60071517756218, +0.67879949508239, -1.04550707592673],
               [-2.86169588073340, +5.99660765711210, +1.08394899986031],
               [+2.09930989272956, -3.36144811062374, -2.72237695164263],
               [+2.64405246349916, +4.15317840474646, +0.27856972788526],
               [+4.69864865613751, +0.26922271535391, -1.30274048619151],
               [-4.63786461351839, +0.79856258572808, -0.96906659938432],
               [-2.57447518692275, -3.08132039046931, -2.54875517521577],
               [-5.88211879210329, 11.88491819358157, +2.31866455902233],
               [-8.18022701418703, 10.95619984550779, +1.83940856333092],
               [-5.08172874482867, 12.66714386256482, -0.92419491629867],
               [-3.18311711399702, 13.44626574330220, -0.86977613647871],
               [-5.07177399637298, 10.99164969235585, -2.10739192258756],
               [-6.35955320518616, 14.08073002965080, -1.68204314084441],
           ]
       ),
   )
   numbers = d3.util.pack(
       (
           sample1["numbers"],
           sample2["numbers"],
       )
   )
   positions = d3.util.pack(
       (
           sample1["positions"],
           sample2["positions"],
       )
   )
   ref = d3.reference.Reference()
   rcov = d3.data.covalent_rad_d3[numbers]
   rvdw = d3.data.vdw_rad_d3[numbers.unsqueeze(-1), numbers.unsqueeze(-2)]
   r4r2 = d3.data.sqrt_z_r4_over_r2[numbers]
   param = {
       "a1": torch.tensor(0.49484001),
       "s8": torch.tensor(0.78981345),
       "a2": torch.tensor(5.73083694),
   }

   cn = d3.ncoord.coordination_number(numbers, positions, rcov, d3.ncoord.exp_count)
   weights = d3.model.weight_references(numbers, cn, ref, d3.model.gaussian_weight)
   c6 = d3.model.atomic_c6(numbers, weights, ref)
   energy = d3.disp.dispersion(
       numbers, positions, c6, rvdw, r4r2, d3.disp.rational_damping, **param
   )

   torch.set_printoptions(precision=10)
   print(torch.sum(energy, dim=-1))
   # tensor([-0.0014092578, -0.0057840119])


Contributing
------------

This is a volunteer open source projects and contributions are always welcome.
Please, take a moment to read the `contributing guidelines <CONTRIBUTING.md>`__.


License
-------

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the “License”);
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an *“as is” basis*,
*without warranties or conditions of any kind*, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally
submitted for inclusion in this project by you, as defined in the
Apache-2.0 license, shall be licensed as above, without any additional
terms or conditions.
